Narrator:
Tonight on "MasterChef"...
- Ashley: Oh, my God!
- Whoa!
Ashley:
They're landing for dinner!
when the top 10 cook
for American heroes...
100 airmen.
This is massive!
- expectations...
- Hanger steak.
- That's a no-no.
- ...are sky-high.
- These are incinerated.
- How do we serve that
to the Air Force?
- ( plate shatters )
- Emily: Oh, my God!
We're getting invaded...
Joe:
This pork chop's
completely raw.
...and I'm about to call
for a mayday,
because we all might
be going down.
Go away. Go away.
MasterChef zero-niner.
March Tower,
check wheels down.
Runway three two,
wind at three, one,
zero at four.
Clear to land.
Gordon:
Roger that, March Tower.
Cleared for landing,
see you on the deck.
( cheers and applause )
Cesar:
Making top 10 is
a huge achievement.
It's mental strength.
It's emotional fortitude.
It's not an achievement that
should be taken for granted.
I've never seen a drone
in person.
Emily:
We've got drones
and cargo planes
and fighter jets.
So this is obviously
our battleground,
and we're here today
to fight it out.
I just know something crazy
is about to happen.
Gerron: That's dope!
You see that?
Oh! What is this?
( cheers and applause )
Gerron: All of a sudden,
Aarón and Joe pop up.
I'm like, "What the hell?"
These guys come in crazy
every time.
- Who's that in the jet?
- Yeah, no, he's moving.
- No! No way!
- Oh, my God!
- No way!
- Oh!
- No!
- No way.
Chef Ramsay's dope.
( cheering )
Shanika:
These guys look so cute!
They've got their little
glasses on.
Gordon comes out
of the damn jet.
This is cool.
Welcome to March
Air Reserve Base.
( cheering )
The March Air Reserve Base
is one of the oldest
and one of the most
prolific airfields
operated by the
United States military.
The base actually opened
its doors in 1918,
which means this year
it's celebrating
its hundredth anniversary.
And today, you guys will be
splitting up into two teams
to cook for 100 airmen.
Awesome. Yes!
I feel so honored.
My grandfather was a part
of the Air Force,
and I have a huge respect
for where we are right now.
This is incredible.
Emily and Cesar,
because you did the best in
the halibut skills challenge,
today, you will be
our team captains.
Samantha:
I'm not thrilled about Emily
or Cesar for captain.
Cesar can be a little
overbearing.
And I think Emily is just kind
of pretentious, honestly.
- Emily, how are you feeling?
- I run a team
of project analysts
that do primary research.
So, I mean, the kitchen should
be run no differently.
I think it's my time to shine.
Well, very,
very interesting information.
- Uh-oh.
- But today,
your teams are picking you.
- Mm.
- Of course.
If you wanna be
on Emily's team,
you will stand over
to the right.
If you wanna be
on Cesar's team,
you'll go on the left.
Back in my playground days,
I was always kind of second,
if not last pick for sports.
So, hopefully, more than one
person walks over to my side.
Does everyone know
where they're going?
- Yes.
In one, two, three. Go.
- Gordon: Wow. Wow!
- Joe: Wow! Interesting.
Even.
I've never seen such a clear
decision-making take place
in the history of
this competition.
Wow. Right, captains,
please head over
and give your teams their
aprons, please. Thank you.
I'm really, really happy
to be on Cesar's team,
because Emily,
she is so controlling.
Red team, blue team, you will
have 75 minutes to prep
and just 60 minutes to cook
100 composed plates.
Make "MasterChef" proud.
If you don't, you'll be heading
straight into battle
in the dreaded pressure test.
- Okay?
- All: Yes, Chef!
Your time starts...
...now.
- Here we go, guys.
- Let's go.
Gordon:
Let's go.
- Whoo!
- Aarón: Come on, guys.
All right, guys, what protein
are y'all thinking about?
I think the hanger steak.
I mean, we're in a hangar.
A hanger steak.
Yeah, that makes sense.
What are y'all thinking
for sides?
- I'm thinking asparagus.
- Yeah, I think the asparagus.
- Just do it nice and simple
in the oven.
- Okay.
And then I can do a polenta cake
and I can even put some
goat cheese in there.
- I like that. Okay, okay.
- Make it a little bit sharper.
The pressure on a captain
during any team challenge
is incredible.
Your team can die or live
by a single decision
the captain makes.
So I know that's already
on my shoulders.
- Are we gonna grill?
- Because of the wind,
I think the grill's
not gonna get hot enough.
We'll go pan-sear.
- Are you sure?
- Yes.
I don't think pan-sear
is a great idea.
We have such a big grill here
for a reason.
I am not cool with that.
Cesar:
Come on, guys.
Let's do this.
What are our first thoughts
on proteins?
- Salmon.
- I'm thinking salmon as well.
Pork, I think, is an easier go
when it comes
- to marking,
finish in the oven--
- Okay, but what I feel like
with the salmon is, we have
a hundred people to feed.
How can we get this pork done
in time to feed a 101 people?
Because we have 75 minutes
to prep before we even serve.
Shanika:
I think pork chop
is a mistake.
Salmon doesn't take
that long to cook.
We can be a little
bit more organized,
but pork chop it shall be.
What do you think about doing,
like, a peach chutney
- to go along
with the pork chop?
- Yes, yes.
Peaches, pork go really well
with balsamic.
- If we do--
- No balsamic, no balsamic.
If we throw balsamic in a pan
and reduce it down to a glaze,
it's one of our garnish
elements on the plate.
- Balsamic and peaches
don't go together.
- But we're keeping it separate,
so, we don't--
They do, they do.
But when you eat,
you eat a combination
of everything together.
- It doesn't go.
- I'm saying that's our--
Have you ever heard of
a peach balsamic dressing?
You know, Shanika,
this is not the Shanika show.
This is "MasterChef."
Either get on board
or you need to rethink maybe
what team you chose to be on.
No matter what,
we need a ( bleep ) plan B.
Period. We need a plan B.
This is going to be a battle.
Joe:
Very exciting luncheon.
The bar is super high.
Two amazing captains
in Emily and Cesar.
Julia:
We can do triangles
of polenta.
- And then the sauce
on the side.
- I like that idea.
Now, Cesar's a talented,
super smart teacher.
Will he have the vocal cords
today to lead his team
to victory?
I don't know how much
of a leader he really is.
I don't know how vocal
he can be.
- So-- Yeah.
- Are you sure you wanna
just do the ends?
I feel like this is
a waste of asparagus,
just cutting the tips off.
Cesar:
We're looking good, guys.
Just keep going at this speed.
Blue team captained by Emily.
Smart, articulate, vocal.
Do all the peaches,
you guys.
Do not underestimate
a hundred portions.
Joe:
She's got all the makings
to be a true chef
in a field challenge.
Let's see if she can rise
to that occasion today.
Emily:
A lot of salt.
Yeah, yeah.
- Okay.
- The salt is like a quick
brine, and it actually acts
- to make the pork moister
once we cook it. Okay?
- Okay.
So, Emily, please,
describe your dish.
Yeah, so we are doing
a grilled pork chop
over sautéed Swiss chard,
a cauliflower puree,
and a peach chutney.
A bone-in pork chop for me
is a high degree of risk.
- Yeah.
- How you gonna cook it?
We're grilling it and then
finishing it in the oven.
I think presentation-wise
and flavor-wise,
it's worth the risk.
If you nail it, it's great,
but you could go a safer route.
- That's true.
- Who made that decision, you?
- I did make that decision.
- All right.
- Live and die by it.
- Hoping I don't live
to regret it.
I hope not.
- Right, Cesar.
- Yes, Chef.
Give me an insight to the dish.
What are you doing?
All right, so we're doing
a pan-seared hanger steak, Chef.
We're gonna brush it
with chimichurri sauce
right before it's done.
We're doing a goat cheese
polenta, sautéed asparagus,
and I'm doing a red jalapeño
and peach salsa to go with it.
So, we're talking about
pan-seared hanger steak.
That's a no-no, right there.
Big no-no.
What does a hanger steak need?
- It needs high--
- Charring.
- It needs high heat.
- High intensity. There we go.
- Yes, Chef. Mm-hmm.
- Okay?
The grill's there,
nobody's using it.
- Yes, Chef.
- I'm trying to help here.
- Okay? Samantha.
- Yes, Chef.
- What are you doing?
- I'm cutting asparagus.
- Cutting asparagus.
- Yep.
Oh, my Lord.
- Look at me.
- Yes.
They're young asparagus.
- They're weeks old.
- Yeah.
They're delicious.
Why are we cutting
off the best part?
I-- I was doing
what I was told, Chef.
- I was told to cut them off.
- Cesar, come over, please.
Yes, Chef.
- Are you upset with me?
- No, Chef, I'm not upset
with you.
But-- But look! This is
all going in the trash.
- I'm upset about that.
- So why do it?
Samantha:
I'm pissed right now.
I told Cesar in the beginning
that we shouldn't be
cutting it that way.
- Look. Trash. Hey!
- I know. I know.
- Air Force. Trash. Air Force.
- Yeah.
I don't get it.
If we go down because of
something as simple
as roasted asparagus,
that is on you, Cesar.
- Gordon: Red team.
- Red team: Yes, Chef.
How do we serve that
to the Air Force?
I-- I'm sorry, Chef.
I should've spoken up
a little bit more.
Honestly, guys,
this is so stupid.
Yeah, I agree.
I'm pissed about this
right now.
I have my mentor
Chef Gordon Ramsay
yelling at me for how
this asparagus is cut,
when Cesar told me to do it.
Thanks a lot, Cesar.
Please, work with your brains.
- All: Yes, Chef.
- Thank you. Come on!
Guys, if you open the oven,
close it, please.
- Sam, you gotta keep your cool.
- I am trying, Cesar!
I'm just trying to do what
everybody is telling me to do.
Remember who
we're cooking for, y'all.
Focus on that meat, Ashley.
Guys, guys, guys,
don't do this.
Unbelievable.
Guys, these are incinerated.
- Big mistake. Oh, my God.
- Aarón: Get 'em out.
Finish 'em in the oven.
Emily, what problem
do you see here already?
Well, this is not done.
- This is totally burnt.
- Burnt.
- How's that gonna look
on a dish? No.
- Not great.
You don't realize
how much pressure
the team captain is under
until you're actually put
in that situation.
Flip 'em, flip 'em,
flip 'em, go!
Work faster, faster,
faster, faster.
There you go.
Joe: This is like a ( bleep )
comedy show, these two
on the grill.
- This one's rare.
And this one's burnt.
- Yes.
The pork chops are
at the same time being
burnt and undercooked.
Oh, my God, guys.
I can't serve
a black pork chop.
I mean, at this point
I'm about to call for a mayday,
because we might be
going down.
- Oh, there they are.
There they are. Look.
- Oh, wow.
How cool is that?
Red team, blue team,
our guests are arriving.
Look. Parachutes in the air.
Gerron:
Wow!
- Whoa!
- Oh!
Is that a bird, a plane?
No, it's airmen falling
from the sky.
Emily:
Our guests are arriving, guys!
Farhan:
Wow.
Emily:
Guys, this is insane.
Wow, that's incredible.
- Look at that.
- Whoa!
Aarón:
Unbelievable. Look at this.
Samantha:
Airmen are coming from the sky.
They're coming from behind
all the planes.
They're coming
from all angles.
They're invading
our kitchens right now.
- Whoa!
- Guys, keep working.
- Don't look up at the sky.
- Yep. Okay.
Are they gonna help us plate?
'Cause I don't think so.
- Hello, hello.
- Oh, my God!
- They're landing for dinner.
- Farhan: Wow!
I see why the Air Force
is the Air Force.
These are people that work
so hard to keep us safe.
And we really wanna
do our best with this meal.
Gordon:
Red team, blue team,
guests are lining up.
Start to serve, please.
Let's go!
Come on, guys!
We're serving now!
- All right, heard serving.
- Julia: Thank you.
Taylor:
Thank you so much
for your service.
Cesar:
We have a grilled
hanger steak,
goat cheese polenta,
roasted asparagus,
and peach
and red jalapeño salsa.
- Joe: Here they come.
- Thank you.
Thank you so much
for your service.
Emily:
We got a grilled pork chop
over sautéed Swiss chard.
We've got a cauliflower puree
topped with a peach chutney.
Emily:
Shanika, I will do the greens.
Um, okay.
Can you start placing
our pork chops, please?
Oh, my God! Look at this one.
Look at this one.
- Shanika: The hell
we was thinking.
- Emily: Let me check.
Let you check this?
Whoo! I did not know
coming into this team
that Emily was so controlling.
This is-- This one's rare.
This is why I wanted to do
the damn salmon, captain.
( groans )
Honestly, Shanika
is the only person left
who is still hanging on
to the salmon.
Shanika, do you feel
comfortable cooking pork?
- Hell, nah. I'll plate.
- Oh, great.
I told you I didn't
wanna do this damn pork.
She can see that
negative spark of energy
that just transfers
like wildfire to everyone.
Shanika:
I knew we should've
did damn salmon.
- Nobody wanna listen to me.
I know.
- It's coming.
- Pork is easy to cook
if you know what you're doing.
- Yeah, yeah.
- You don't need to get sassy.
- You're the one
that's getting sassy.
- Bowen: Those are raw.
- They're raw.
( bleep )
Try the--
The smaller ones, Bowen.
Take the smaller ones, Bowen.
We cannot serve raw meat.
This is a hundredth
anniversary.
This isn't
some backyard barbecue.
- It's raw.
- Okay, then grab another one.
Let's go. Come on.
I am 3-0 in team challenges,
and I don't intend
on losing today.
Like, seriously, red team,
we need to get it together.
- Guys, we need steaks now.
- Steaks going in the oven.
Guys, those standards have to be
as high as they can be.
A hundred years, baby.
Let's go.
Gordon: Do you know
if they're cooked or not?
- Gerron, are these cooked?
- Yeah, they are.
- Touch 'em. Those are cooked.
- They were the first batch
that came out.
- Emily approved them.
- Julia: Emily approved them.
- Shanika: Emily approved them.
- Stop. Stop right there.
Blue team, come here.
- Stop. Come here.
- Yes, Chef.
Stop.
Stop right there.
We're in trouble here.
- That is not gonna
get you a vote.
- No.
Captain, you need to be
a little bit more protective.
You can't just,
"They're all cooked!"
Get a grip.
- Yes, Chef.
- Okay, Chef.
- Emily.
- Yes, Chef.
I'm gonna look as stupid as you
if that goes out.
- Yes. Absolutely.
- Okay?
You have no stripes
on your shoulders.
What does that mean?
- That means I'm a cadet.
Air Force academy.
- You're a cadet.
We're on the Air Force parachute
team, The Wings of Blue.
All right, who is gonna
vote for the red team?
Hands in the air.
And blue team?
Thank you very much. Good luck
with your career, guys.
I really loved everything
on my blue plate.
And whatever this chutney is
is delicious.
The pork chop
was cooked perfectly,
but the red team,
the steak was just amazing.
Beautiful steak, medium rare.
Come on!
- Everything well?
No. What's wrong?
- No.
Oh, my God,
it's completely raw.
- Yeah.
- Let me have this, guys.
- Give me a second.
I apologize.
- All right. Thank you.
I need a pan of pork, please.
Pan of pork to the pass.
- Guys, we got a problem.
- What's wrong, Joe, please?
- This pork chop's
completely raw. Like, raw.
- Oh, no. No.
- Like, cold in the middle.
- Oh, no. ( bleep )
Embarrassing.
Emily:
You have got to be
kidding me.
This is not just
a little pink in the middle.
This is like it was kissed
by the grill and then
sent out on a plate.
- Gerron! Ashley!
- Yes, Chef.
- No!
- Come on, guys.
- Don't fall apart now.
Let's go.
- Heard.
Emily:
I'm depending on my team
to be my parachute.
And if they can't execute,
then we're done for.
It's a hundred year anniversary.
Happy birthday.
- Guys, we got a problem.
- What's wrong, Joe?
- Pork chop's
completely raw. Like, raw.
- Oh, no. No.
- Like, cold in the middle.
Embarrassing.
- Oh, no.
Shanika:
Damn it.
- Emily.
- Yes, Chef.
- You're supposed to be
the captain.
- Yes, Chef.
Emily, what kind of
captain are you
if you're not really
doing your job?
If we lose
this challenge right now,
it's gonna be
because of Emily.
How we doing?
How's the red team
and blue team?
- Any problems?
- Yeah, just with the--
the red team.
There's actually a hair
in my dish.
Where? Oh, my God.
You have a hair.
It's in the asparagus.
- Yes.
- Oh, my God.
- Is that yours?
- No, it's not my hair.
- 'Cause it's not mine.
It's not yours.
- Right. Right.
All right, I'm gonna go back
and see if they have an
explanation for this.
- Gordon: Red team.
- Red team: Yes, Chef.
Just under 20 guests left,
guys, yeah?
- Yes, Chef.
- Quality, right?
- Guys, guys, guys.
Gordon, we have a problem.
- What's wrong?
Oh, jeez. Come on.
- Oh, Lord.
- Embarrassing.
Taylor:
It's either me or Julia.
And I'm like, "( bleep )!"
Please get
a ( bleep ) grip, now.
Okay, Chef.
Julia:
Guys, we need more steaks!
Come on!
- Samantha: I'm on it.
- Julia: Come on, guys.
Gordon:
Ladies and gentlemen, could
you please cast your votes.
Thank you.
I'm definitely going to be
voting for the red team.
The steak was just cooked
wonderfully.
I really loved everything
on my blue plate.
They did a really good job.
Gerron: Check those.
Just make sure
they're done.
- I poked the middle.
- Yep.
They are cooked.
Thank you, Gerron.
No problem, Chef.
I'm gonna have to go
with the red team.
I thought the hanger steak
was cooked great.
There's a good char.
I thought it was a great dish.
Gordon:
Your last plate, red team.
Come on.
- Thank you for waiting.
- Well done. Clear up.
- Thank you, Chef.
Cesar: Besides the hair,
I'm confident
that the flavors
that we presented today
will win us at least
that one deciding vote.
The blue team's pork is
a lot more flavorful
than the red team's steak.
Definitely.
The blue team is really good.
Well done.
What screwed it for you all
is the control of the pork.
But the most important thing is
a hundred got served. Okay?
- Clear down.
- All: Yes, Chef.
Emily:
We fell apart
a little bit at the end,
but we only had one pork chop
that came back very rare,
um, which I think when cooking
pork is almost a miracle.
I told y'all
we shoulda used damn salmon.
- No, nobody wanna do salmon.
- No, no, no, no, no, no.
That was not the issue.
I mean, stay positive,
think on the positive side.
I'm trying to stay positive,
but you know why we messed up.
- Uh--
- Out of all of those
pork chops that was cooked,
one came back raw.
- Gerron and Emily: One.
- You got a point.
- I'm going for the blue.
- Red.
- Blue.
All right, it looks like
we're a table divided.
It's gonna be pretty
interesting.
- Right. Thank you.
- ( cheers and applause )
Ladies and gentlemen,
we hope you all enjoyed
a delicious lunch.
And a special thank you
to all the airmen
that dedicate your lives
on a daily basis
to keeping us and this
incredible country safe.
Thank you all so much.
- ( applause )
- Thank you so much.
So, both teams fought hard
to serve their best today,
but ultimately one of these
teams will be safe
and the other will go into
the dreaded pressure test.
It looks like
the results are in.
Wherever he lands,
that will confirm
today's winner.
Oh, my God.
This is intense.
The winning team
to help celebrate
the hundredth
anniversary is...
...the blue team!
( cheering )
Gordon: Wow.
We freakin' pulled it off.
All right, Emily,
I ain't mad no more.
Whoo! We did it.
But wait a minute.
There is one more parachute
in the air.
- What?
- Oh, man.
What?
Another skydiver?
Where in the hell
does he think he's going?
He is landing on...
Oh, I can't watch.
Oh, my God.
- Gordon: On red!
- ( cheers and applause )
Cesar: Whoa, we got a tie!
Oh, my God.
Gordon:
That is extraordinary.
Ladies and gentlemen,
that means
for the first time ever
in the history
of "MasterChef",
we have a tie!
- Oh, my Lord.
- ( cheers and applause )
Gordon:
Wow. Wow!
Emily:
It's a tie.
What do we even do now?
That means us, as judges,
will need to break this tie...
...tomorrow morning,
0800 sharp,
back in
the MasterChef kitchen.
Incredible. Ladies
and gentlemen,
give them a round
of applause, please.
That is extraordinary.
Never in the history
of "MasterChef"
have we ever had a tie.
Cesar:
The battle may be over,
but the war is definitely gonna
continue between blue and red
once we step back
into the MasterChef kitchen.
Who would've thought that?
Amazing.
Line up, please.
Welcome back.
Emily:
It's a tie.
First time ever
in "MasterChef" history.
The blue team
started off strong
and our communication
was on point.
At least four
out of five of us
had a common goal
and a common vision,
but I think Shanika
is really weighing us down
at this point.
So, however
this is gonna pan out,
I hope that she goes home
as soon as possible.
All 10 of you made
"MasterChef" history
with our first ever tie.
Unfortunately,
it is our duty
to decide a winning team
and a losing team.
The losing team will face
the pressure test.
Oh, my God.
After which at least one
of you ten will go home.
Now, we do have
a winning team.
And that team is,
by the narrowest of margins,
the... red team.
- ( sighs )
- Oh, my God.
Yes, it was a 50-50 draw,
but based on the feedback
and discussing every vote,
it was a more
comprehensive dish
and it was better received.
- Well done.
- Thank you, Chef.
- Head up to
the balcony, please.
- Thank you.
- Congrats, guys.
- Congrats, y'all.
So, blue team, please put on
those black pressure test aprons
that are behind you.
When you lose,
it kind of sucks.
But at the end of the day,
I'm not kissing
nobody's behind to be safe.
If something is wrong,
I'm gonna say how I feel,
and that is it.
So whatever's gonna happen today
is gonna happen.
Joe: For your
pressure test tonight,
you'll be making something
very difficult--
an extremely technical,
multilayered culinary classic.
The infamous...
Black Forest cake.
- Voila.
- Wow.
- Whoa.
- I am not scared of baking.
It might be
a Black Forest cake.
I may never have made or eaten
a Black Forest cake before,
but baking is my wheelhouse.
Shanika and everyone else
down here in the kitchen
should be scared as hell
because they know
that my Black Forest cake
is going to one of the best,
if not the best.
Tonight, we are looking
for a perfect replication
of this masterpiece
in front of me.
We wanna see
the four incredible,
- light, fluffy layers...
- Nice.
...evenly cooked, and more
importantly, evenly frosted.
And then that beautiful sour,
sweet cherry mouthful
has to be had
across every bite.
From a patisserie
point of view,
it takes not months,
but years to master.
It's an architectural
nightmare.
Get this wrong
at the beginning,
this whole thing
could collapse.
All right, guys,
before you all start baking
- there's just one more thing.
- ( sighs )
Emily, you have a very
important decision to make.
This is gonna be
the single biggest decision
that you have made
in this kitchen.
You can either now pick
one person from your team
to go up against head-to-head
in this challenge,
and for that,
you would be saving
three other home cooks.
Or you can save just yourself.
Whoa.
I know what it's like
to be safe up
on the balcony,
and that's the best feeling
on the face of the planet.
But on the flipside,
I also have skills
that I think could be beneficial
in this pressure test.
Unless something
catastrophic happens,
I could make a fantastic
Black Forest cake.
I'm gonna choose
to go head-to-head.
- Wow!
- Wow.
I am a believer
in positive communication,
and respecting people
in the kitchen.
So, I will have to say
go head-to-head with Shanika.
- I'm ready.
- I'm sorry, Joe.
- We're both on your team.
- I'm losing on
every front here.
Ashley, Farhan, Gerron, get up
to the safety of the balcony.
Shanika:
Okay, Emily,
I'm not the best baker,
but I know that I'm strong
and I'm determined.
You wanna battle it out?
Let's fight.
This is it.
The baking battle
of the century.
At your stations, you'll have
everything that you need
to make a perfect
Black Forest cake.
And you'll have just
75 minutes to make it happen.
Both of you, please,
head to your stations.
Shanika:
Emily is the strongest baker.
This is like
David and Goliath.
I don't know
how I'm gonna do this,
other than me staying focused,
but I am not going home.
We're gonna battle this out
to the bitter end,
and the best cake shall win.
Your 75 minutes start now.
- Come on, guys.
- Let's go!
Come on, y'all.
We need vanilla in the batter,
milk in the batter.
Where are my eggs?
Guys, we're witnessing
the biggest baking battle
- in history
of this competition.
- ( sighs )
- Teaspoon.
- I really believe
that Emily could win
this whole thing,
and I might lose her.
And then
she doubled downed on me
by choosing to
go against another
one of my team members,
Shanika.
So, I will lose
one apron today.
Guys, I love Black Forest cake.
How do you make it?
For me, it's all
about that sponge.
- So first off,
you gotta whip that butter.
- All right.
Add the eggs,
and then incorporate the sugar,
- and then the cocoa powder.
- All right.
The most important part
is the equal measures
of sponge
you put in those tins.
A millimeter higher-lower,
then you have already
an uneven cake layer.
Big difference-- Emily weighed
out the batter in each one,
- and Shanika's doing it by eye.
- Let's go, Shanika.
Get that cake
in the oven.
Emily's in the oven,
and under ten minutes.
- That's incredible.
- All right.
Oh, man. Shanika,
confident you can nail this?
Um, I'm feeling good.
I mean, it is what it is.
I guess that's what you get
for being opinionated
and speaking your mind.
- Ever made
a Black Forest cake before?
- Nope.
- I'm allergic to chocolate.
- You're allergic to chocolate?
- Yep.
- Wow. But you're a fighter.
I never back down
from a fight.
Now if you were captain,
who would you have chosen
to go head-to-head with?
I probably would've
did the same thing.
She's just a nasty girl.
You've got 60 minutes
to nail this.
- Good luck.
- Thank you very much.
- Come on, Shanika.
- Emily.
- Yes, sir.
- I'm slightly disappointed
to see you here right now.
What are you thinking?
I think Shanika has maybe
overstayed her welcome.
- Oh.
- Ha! Overstayed
my damn welcome.
Girl, it's going down tonight.
- So it's a personal thing?
- It's personal
and professional.
In professional,
she was not in the challenge,
- and this is the punishment.
- She's gonna be her own demise.
So is everything going to plan?
No variables so far?
My variable was putting
a little extra cocoa powder
- into my cake batter.
- I saw that.
It certainly takes
a lot of confidence
with all the chips
on the table...
- Mm-hmm.
- ...to double down
by varying a classic recipe,
but, you know, it could work.
- Better pull it through.
- Hopefully I do.
Gordon:
45 minutes to go, guys.
Let's go.
- Top dog versus underdog.
- You're in for a shock.
Shanika is allergic
to chocolate.
- What?
- She cannot taste chocolate.
Shanika has dropped
the bombshell.
- Hope I have enough.
- Oh, man.
Emily has gone
double down,
and she's making the cocoa
percentage much higher
in the sponge cake,
so it's risky.
- Right on schedule.
- Once the sponge is made,
you then start
with your frosting.
I did not add
my vanilla extract.
I gotta put
that back in there.
You need that lovely frosting
to be not too buttery,
and sweet enough against
the sourness of the cherries.
And then you start thinking
about the chopping
of the cherries,
incorporating that
through the frosting,
and making sure
there's no ragged edges.
Anything ragged
in the middle of that layer,
you're gonna
rip and tear that cake
the minute
you start slicing it.
I don't think she cooled down
her cake enough.
Do not try to put cream
or layer any kind of cake
if that cake is even warm.
( sighs )
Oh, my God.
Emily's looks too tall, guys.
It's looking like
The Leaning Tower of Pisa.
Julia:
Hers looks like it's leaning.
What I don't want to do
is to put
this cream on this cake
and it is not ready for it.
( sighs )
Because this cake will
collapse if it's too hot--
- from the cream.
- 20 minutes remaining.
Aarón:
So, Shanika is up
to her third layer.
Her cake is smaller
than Emily's.
You have-- oh, my God.
Farhan: ( whispers )
Oh, no, her cake fell over.
All you see is this cream
smeared on the side of the door.
This is catastrophic.
I don't know if there's any
bouncing back from this.
- You okay?
- Uh, no.
You have-- oh, my God.
Farhan: ( whispers )
Oh, no, her cake fell over.
- You okay?
- Uh, no.
- What happened?
- The cake was fine
when I put it
in the blast chiller.
Unfortunately,
it's not fine taking it out
of the blast chiller,
and it toppled over.
- Um-- Yep.
- Well, you still got 15 minutes
to go to change it.
This could literally not have
happened at a worse time.
There's no time
to re-bake my cake.
to reconstruct it.
Shanika:
It was too hot, girl.
You took it out too fast.
Everything has fallen apart.
Not only my cake,
but my entire plan
to send Shanika home.
Julia:
They were too warm.
( sighs )
Oh, my God.
- ( sighs )
- What went on there?
Emily's cake had fallen over
in the blast chiller.
Ugh, come on, man.
Emily's cake is so tall,
and the blast chiller could
actually blow it over
- Mm.
- if that sponge is not cold.
This is a nightmare.
( sighs )
There is almost no way
to come back from that.
Gordon:
Five minutes to go.
You've got to start looking
at the finishing touches.
I'm just trying
to get these sides even.
Come on, Shanika,
start decorating.
Get it on that glass.
All right,
decorating it shall be.
- It's beautiful.
- Thank you, Bowen.
Gordon:
Last three minutes!
Chocolate on there,
every little shard you've got,
and make them look incredible.
- Come on.
- Okay, Chef, gotcha.
- Come on, ladies.
You've got this.
- Oh, my God.
Aarón:
There you go. Come on, Emily.
Last minute!
Come on, please, let's go.
- Finishing touches.
- Let's go, Shanika.
It might not be the perfect one,
but I shall try.
Judges:
Ten, nine, eight,
- seven, six, five...
- Oh, my God.
...four, three, two, one.
- Gordon:
And stop! Well done.
- Well done.
Joe:
Wow! That was intense.
Now, both of you bring
your cakes
down to front bench.
Thank you.
My cake was in pieces
ten minutes ago,
and I have reassembled this
into something resembling
a Black Forest cake.
It's by no means my best work,
but I know
it's good enough to stay.
Two home cooks,
both wearing my aprons,
and one of you will
be going home tonight.
Let's see how you did.
Okay, Emily, tell me
what happened.
( laughs )
My cake fell over.
- Wow!
- I think I recovered nicely,
- but disaster struck today.
- You built it high.
It's considerably higher
than Shanika's. Why is that?
Perhaps because
the depth of my cake layers,
but also because I made sure
to have a nice layer
of whipped cream in between
all four of my layers.
Apart from it falling over,
is there anything else you
would've done differently?
Nothing that I would've
done differently,
but something
that I did do differently,
mine has just a touch
more cocoa powder
in the cake itself
just to give it
a little bit more richness
and balance out the lightness
of the whipped cream.
The question is really, like,
what the layers are like.
How's that look?
- Not as great
as it could look.
- No.
What happened to the layers
of whipped cream?
They compressed.
So this is like a rich,
chocolate sponge cake?
The cherries themselves,
did you do anything to them?
I quartered the cherries
for the filling on the inside.
The sponge, um...
is very, very moist,
and has a very assertive
chocolate flavor,
which I like.
The extra chocolate paid off.
Cherries are good.
Nice and crunchy.
You can taste the alcohol.
It's too bad we don't have
more cream in between.
The amount of cake to cream--
the ratio's way off.
- Mm-hmm.
- That's where I'm having
a bit of trouble here.
Thank you.
Emily, you're happy
with the flavor
of the cake itself?
All of the different elements
jiving well together?
I am. I think
the richness of the cake
is cut by the lightness
of the whipped cream
and the tartness
of the cherries.
Um, I think the construction
of the cake suffered
by many different variables.
I just want more cherry flavor,
I think, 'cause it's so dense.
If I had it my way,
I would've taken
those cherries
and put 'em
in the food processor
and made a paste.
And then I would've
spread the paste
on each layer evenly
'cause then I would've got
just little pops of cherry.
But what I do love,
I love the additional
cocoa powder.
I think it's necessary.
I think you have
a lot of richness
'cause your chantilly cream
is so deep and rich.
And I think that small change
made a big difference
in the overall flavor
of the cake.
And that's what I find
the most memorable.
Shanika:
Emily's cake wasn't perfect,
but at the end of the day,
it's all gonna come down to what
my cake looks like inside.
I'm hoping
that my layers are there.
that everything is even.
Oh, MasterChef gods,
help me out.
Okay, Shanika.
Well done.
Tough 75 minutes.
- How are you feeling?
- Relieved that it's over,
and just ready for judgment.
Something fascinating
happened.
Emily's weighing out her tins
to the absolute gram,
and you're just
putting it in with the eye.
You weighed nothing out, why?
- I just went by scoop
and just on hopes that--
- By scoop.
- ( clicks tongue )
- We need four
immaculate layers...
- Absolutely right.
- ...in order to build
this cake beautifully,
and start off
with a consistent base.
So without weighing
any of your mixture,
how'd you know
it's evenly layered?
I'm just hoping
for the best right now.
Let's get in there.
I love the little shards
of chocolate on top.
Knife is smoothly
going through. It's light.
And here we are.
Let's have a look.
- ( gasps )
- Wow.
And here we are.
Let's have a look.
( gasps )
Wow. Look at that.
That is beautiful.
( sighs )
That's beautiful.
Emily, what do you think?
I think she's got
whipped cream
in between each
of her layers of cake.
Um...
...it's delicious.
It really is delicious.
It's rich,
it's nicely soaked.
Visually you can see
the four layers,
but cherries
a little bit too big.
- So it's a little bit chunky.
- Okay.
So when we cut through them,
it tears.
- But well done.
- Thank you, Chef.
Thank you.
So, Emily, "JB" on your pin.
Shanika, "JB" on your pin.
This is, like, an epic moment.
It's like when Venus
and Serena play,
- who does the dad root for?
- ( laughter )
- That's a good question.
- That is a good one.
That's the position
I find myself in.
So, clearly you have layers
with cherries in them.
- Yes.
- Now, the construction
of this cake allows me...
- ( chuckles )
- ...to enjoy it in
a more traditional way,
where I can just kinda
take a bite and it should
have everything.
Shanika:
It should.
The sponge cake is good.
It's light.
Very flavorful.
Chantilly cream, very good.
But a Black Forest cake needs
to be a juicy cake.
- Mm-hmm.
- I like your cake.
All the elements
of it are good,
but it tastes like
a chocolate pound cake
with chantilly cream
and a couple of cherries in it.
For me, it's not really
saying Black Forest.
Okay.
Ugh.
Emily, Shanika,
please come around
to the front. Thank you.
Honestly, Shanika is
the one that deserves
to go home tonight.
Maybe she got
her layers correct,
but at the end of the day,
my flavors are more on point,
and I'm hoping
that gets me through.
Ladies, quite possibly
the most difficult,
the most stressful 75 minutes
of all of your culinary lives.
Emily, well done.
Shanika, well done.
You've left us
with very little room
to decide on
who is leaving shortly.
Right now,
Joe, Aarón, and myself
are in desperate need
of a very serious discussion.
Please, excuse us for a moment.
Thank you.
So, uh,
this is a tough one.
We have to dissect
each element.
Emily's first.
Great tasting sponge.
Yeah, but visually,
it didn't come together.
She took some liberties
as far as adding some
more cocoa powder.
On the other hand,
Shanika had a more traditional
composition of the cake,
that looked and tasted more
like what we presented
for them to replicate.
I don't agree. I think
it may have looked like it,
it didn't taste more like it.
Shanika's sponge
is a lot lighter,
but Emily's cream--
delicious at the top,
but you had
to search for it.
But if you put it
together on your fork
with the right ratio,
it's delicious.
Yeah, it's a tale
of two cakes.
- I think we know
what we need to do.
- Yes.
Let's go.
Emily, Shanika, this decision
is down to the wire.
Two extraordinary
performances,
and only one person
is staying,
and the other is heading home.
It's been hard enough,
so I'm gonna cut straight
to the chase.
The person leaving
the MasterChef kitchen
is...
...Emily.
- ( exhales )
- Gordon: Oh, dear.
- Shanika, congratulations.
- Thank you, Chef.
Please, head up
to the balcony. Thank you.
This feels unreal right now,
but I am taking my butt up
onto that balcony.
I believed I can do it,
and I did it,
but I know everybody up there
are in disbelief right now.
David has beat Goliath.
Oh, this feels so good.
Emily,
I don't know what to say.
I am losing one
of my home cooks,
and I thought you could've
won the whole thing.
The great words
of Winston Churchill,
"Success is not permanent,
and failure is not fatal.
It's the courage to continue."
And I think you have
the courage to continue.
Absolutely.
Unfortunately,
I have to say it,
Emily, your time is done
in the MasterChef kitchen.
Come here
and say good-bye.
Thank you.
Good luck.
Oh, man.
Oh, dear, oh, dear.
This is one question
I never thought I was
going to be asking you.
Up there,
you know them inside out.
Who do you think is gonna become
America's next MasterChef?
My money is on Ashley
or Farhan, I think.
Oh, lady,
you've been amazing.
Oh, Emily, please,
place your apron
on top of your bench.
Thank you, my darling.
- Gerron: Love you, Ems.
- Love you, Emily.
Emily:
Unfortunately,
today is my day to go home.
But coming from small-town
Neenah, Wisconsin,
all the way to the top ten
of "MasterChef" was a dream,
and it's something that
I'm gonna hold on to forever.
This whole experience
has only added
to my passion for food.
That's only gonna
continue to grow.
It's like that one
little snowball
that starts the avalanche.
- Narrator: Next time...
- Switch!
- Go, go, go, go!
- ...the race to be
the next MasterChef...
- Whack the garlic!
- ...kicks into high gear...
- Let's go!
- ...in an explosive
tag team challenge.
Don't be scared of the fire!
Have you never cooked
over a ( bleep ) grill?
Who will cross
the finish line?
- Perfect.
- Oh, man. That's hot.
And who will fall short?
- 60 seconds to go!
- They're so burnt.
Ugh, this chicken is raw, Sam.
It's burnt. Oh, my God.
- Get it on the plate!
- Oh, my God.
Is he okay?
You've just taken a bite
out of MasterChef.